Summary
	CS150 & CS194: ML505/XUPv5
	EE Courses: Digilent Nexsys2


The current status of the various candidate FPGA boards as well as the CS and EE classes
can be found in the board matrix (sheets 1 and 2).  The big problems are:

	1) Every class has a different board, hence programming environment & problems.
	2) Some of the boards are custom built, making them hard to fix and replace.
	3) Some of the boards are quickly becoming out-dated.
	4) There's little future proofing for any of the current boards.
	5) Introducing a new board is costly in terms of course material updates.
	6) Classes have certain requirements for performance and I/O which must be met.

Given the information in the board matrix, and the status of current FPGA related research
projects, the choice for CS150 and CS194 is easy: they should use the Xilinx ML505/XUPV5.
The ML505 addresses the above concerns better than any of the other boards as shown below:

	1) CS150 and CS194 will share a board.  TAs for CS150 are likely to be taking CS194.
		Of the other boards only the DE3 would likely be appropriate for CS194, however
		it's rigid plugin infrastructure, selectable voltages, low production and
		upcoming obsolescence make it an unsuitable choice.
	2) The ML505/XUPv5 is a standard Xilinx demonstrator board well supported by Xilinx.
		The Altera boards are similarly supported.  In both cases some custom add-on
		boards are likely to be required for e.g. ZigBee and Bluetooth radios.
	3) The ML505/XUPv5 uses the Xilinx Virtex5 chips, which are top-of-the-line.
		Of the other boards only the DE3 contains a similarly top-of-the-line part,
		whose successor has been announced even though the DE3 has barely reached
		production.
	4) Nearly all of the boards have reasonable expansion headers, however the
		ML505/XUPv5 and DE3 have MGTs for very high bandwidth applications.  In
		particular the ML505/XUPv5 has SATA connectors, 1Gb Ethernet and an SFP
		connector for e.g. video applications.
	5) The ML505/XUPv5 will be well supported, including introductory CS150-style labs
		and all board level firmware, by the RAMP project.  That decision is
		final and independent of any course material.  This means that both TAs
		and even course material can be shared easily with research.  No other
		board can come close.  Altera's offer to pay for course development is very
		generous, but the problem of finding someone qualified remains.  None of
		the current batch of TAs has the extensive teaching experience needed to
		re-imagine the class, yet.  Furthermore, their time would, at best, likely
		be split between CS150 and RAMP, meaning that throwing money at this problem
		won't solve it.
	6) All boards have similar levels of I/O in terms of audio and video connections,
		however the Altera boards do not have the network bandwidth to support this.
		All boards have comparable levels of RAM, including SRAM, Flash and DRAM.
		As complex as it is the DDR2 memory on the ML505/XUPv5 and DE3 is probably the
		right choice for CS150 going forward.

The DE3 is comparable on 1-4, the DE2 on 6, and nothing is comparable on 5. The ML505 is a
winner here, given #5 means that CS150 development costs for the ML505/XUPv5 will be
negligable.  Furthermore the ML505/XUPv5 comes out ahead when compared to the existing
CaLinx2+ boards, whereas the DE2-70 is merely comparable and the DE3, with its poor expansion
design and user selectable voltages in a step in the wrong direction.

If we are committed to a new board, only the ML505/XUPv5 is a step forward, and will have
minor, if any, impact on CS150 thanks to collaboration with RAMP, Xilinx and the current
CS150 TAs.






The state of the EE (non-cs150) classes is less clear, and I don't know it as well.  Most of the
classes seem to need some basic features however:

	1) A2D and D2A for interfacing (perhaps OpAmp boards and such even).
	2) A CPU which can be easily programmed without resorting to FPGA CAD tools.
	3) Motor control circuitry
	4) Reasonable size & power consumption for portable applications
	5) Integration with DSP toolflows

My suggestion at this point is to use a smaller, low power FPGA board for these classes.  Points
1 and 3-5 are easy to address this way.  Point 2 can be addressed by generating (ahead of time)
a single FPGA bitfile containing a processor, thereby allowing students to avoid touching any
FPGA tools whatsoever if desired, but leaving the instructor the flexibility to use an FPGA.  This
also means the board can be far simpler than would be possible with a hard-core CPU, making it less
expansive to maintain and use.

The Digilent Nexsys2 seems to be the best choice.  According to Blair Fort, Altera and Terasic do
not make a comparable board, with the closest being the DE1.  The primary requirements
here are size, power and lack of complexity for those classes which do not focus on FPGAs, but
do need processing power and even mobility.

The Nexsys2 supports 1-5 well including a WIDE range of expansion boards and a low price
meaning students could buy their own boards, and experiment before or after the class.  It does
this at the cost of a smaller FPGA as well as requiring course development time and money.
The good news however is that similar Spartan3 based boards have been used by myself and many
of the upcoming batch of TAs and undergraduates working on the RAMP project, meaning that
this development should be accelerated.

My original recommendation was to use an Altera board for the non-CS150 classes, in order to take
advantage of their generous support, and bring them on to campus in some capacity.  However,
as stated by their representative, they have no truly suitable boards.  While a custom board
might be possible, the opportunity to use a current, inexpensive (would be donated, but students
could buy it) and excellently suited board has changed my mind.









My overall impression from Altera is that while they are enthusiastic, they have little to offer
our educational courses, and believe that throwing money and time at problems will make them go
away.  This is, of course, very much a good modus operandi in the business and commercial worlds
but it does not work at an educational institution where competent workers are the limiting
factor.  The overall problem here is that there are a small handful of competent workers, and
to split their time between research, which is a necessary component of education, and teaching
would degrade both to no appreciable gain.

If it's true that Xilinx has sent fewer representatives to Berkeley, it is because they have no
need to strengthen the case for their boards, the hardware and support speaks for itself.
Furthermore the representatives from Altera, though nice people and excellent salesmen have not
been understanding of the need to support research and education together, and being salesmen
have had only a basic grasp of the technical and educational issues attached to board selection.

In short I'm left with the feeling that Altera has promised quite a bit to Berkeley, but they
have yet to deliver anything which we can truly use.  If they have experts at designing course
material, as they have suggested, let them send one.  In they have boards which are an improvement
on the CaLinx2+ even, I have yet to see or hear of one.

By contrast Xilinx, over the years and now, has been quiet but helpful.  If they have promised
less, it is because they promise only that which they know they can deliver in short order and
working condition.

